---
title: "Where are we?"
---

# Where are we?

In this book, we are trying to split the difference between abstraction
and concreteness. On the one hand, abstract examples can be instructive
because they force us to focus on first principles and on the nuts and
bolts of a given model or approach. The problem with this is that
epidemiology as it is practiced in the real world - across all contexts,
including the research world of academia as well as the on the ground
work of public health agences - is very real and concrete.

One solution is to move between the abstract and the concrete by
illustrating concepts at a high level and then showing how they play out
(or donâ€™t) in real world data. This is great, but it leads us to two
other problems that make it iffy at best as a strategy. The first is
that real-world data are often messy and incomplete. These are issues we
have to confront - and will - in this book. But at the same time,
dealing with the mess is really something that comes after you get the
basics. If we jump right into the deep end of the pool, we may not be
able to find our way out. The other problem with real-world data
examples is that good ones are hard to come by and the chance that they
will come from the same place - a shared context - is quite low. When we
are working on real-world problems, we should have visibility into the
different actors and systems at play, even if that visibility is partial
or imperfect. So, relying on isolated examples from varied contexts may
actually work against our ability to think holistically and contextually
about epidemiologic analysis.

So, we are proposing to add a half-step between abstraction and
concreteness, a simulated jurisdiction that reflects the intersecting
and layered aspects of recognizing, measuring, and intervening on
emerging public health challenges in a real-world context. This will sit
between high-level, abstract examples that help us get our analytic feet
under us, and warts-and-all examinations of real-world data. We will be
looking at synthetic data from different jurisdictions within a
simulated U.S. state. It will reflect key sociodemographic aspects of a
state not-unlike (but not exactly like!) a certain one from the
industrial midwest. We will use this as a lens into the different levels
at which epidemiologists and public health professionals examine data
from the state level down to individual outbreaks within towns and
cities. We will examine how different diseases manifest in different
locations and try to get at what can explain this variability. We will
compliment these with data from real-world analogues, but by anchoring
ourselves in our contrived - but realisticish - example, we will be able
to appreciate these snippets of data as windows onto a larger whole
rather than standalone pieces.
